Day 1

As dawn broke on day one, the expedition was split into four separate groups. There was the advanced scouting party, a crack squad of Meg, Piotr, and myself, who had driven out to Basalt the night before and spent the evening acclimating to the altitude (read: putting away a few bevies with my aunt and uncle, gorging ourselves on lasagna that in the following days over yet another freeze-dried meal, we would each fantasize about wildly, and watching a thunderstorm that could principally be described as violent). The next group was Helena, Ben, and Andrea, our initial support force, who were to drive up from Denver that morning and grab a final meal for us to fuel up with at the trailhead. Then we had our duo of Cams, McInnes and Jones. Since Cam M is a big city slicker who runs on NYC time, he figured he'd minimize downtime & maximize profitability by flying in the afternoon of the start day, so Cam J was to pick him up from the airport and head straight out to meet us afterward. Rounding out the squad, we had the incomparable duo of Luke and Teddy (plus their trusty four-legged sidekick, Kenobi) who were going to head up as an adorable lil' domestic unit (s'cute)!

My flock of early birds woke up with the sun and set up a base camp in the parking lot. It was lucky we were there so early because all of our packs needed a little refining/reorganizing, none more than mine. I took the jumble of random food that I had haphazardly thrown into a bag and, with much finagling (and a bit of swearing), eventually crammed it all into my bear canister, including an ill-advised, but undoubtedly delicious and crusty, baguette (not exactly your run-of-the-mill compact backpacking food). At this point, we all realized there was absolutely no cell service, so we really had no idea of where anyone else was or how to coordinate with them. 

Piotr gallantly hoofed it far back down the road to make contact and returned with a set of updates ranging from completely expected to downright troubling. Our initial backup was running a little bit late: expected. The Camwagon had broken down en route but were in the process of finding a new ride out: unexpected and how they'd find us when they got there was unclear, but hey, stranger things have happened. Saving the best/weirdest for last, Kenobi had eaten a bee (seems like a typo as I'm writing it, but I shit you not) and Luke and Teddy were going to have to monitor him through the night. At best, they'd head up the next day and be a day's hike behind us: way out of left field and seemingly a long shot that we'd be able to share even a bit of the trail together.

Without yet even setting foot on the trail, things were already going a bit off the rails. But what could we do but hope for the best, triple-check our gear, and twiddle our thumbs waiting for others to arrive? Not much it seemed. So that's just what we did until the fashionably late Helena, Ben, & Andrea arrived, like heroes of old, brandishing the ultimate pre-trek meal: burritos, hot and fresh (get your foxholes ready, folks). After scarfing them down and running through last-minute details, we figured it was time to get this show on the road as the Cams were a few hours behind us at best. Pushing through the initial wave of tourists crowded around the initial Maroon Bells viewing area, we watched as they gawked at our large packs, toned legs, and air of general badassery. We were kings and queens of the trail, the brave and intrepid heroes carrying on the TRUE legacy of this majestic wilderness. 

This buoyant, egotistic spirit was quick to fade though. Merely a half-mile in, huffing and puffing, we realized that among the attendant rights and privileges of the Four Pass Royalty was the right to drag all of our gear with us and the privilege to do it for nearly another 30 miles… if anyone wanted to back out, this would have been the opportune moment. But with vacation time already locked in, sunk-cost fallacy firmly entrenched, and the vague hope that we were experiencing "Type 2 fun" (not just a pointless exercise in pain), we pushed onwards.

Soon, our bullheadedness would pay dividends as we moved past Crater Lake, the crowds thinning, the mountains closing around us, and the vistas getting more and more beautiful. Resolve renewed, confidence bolstered, and the first-mile jitters in the rearview mirror, we began to ease into the journey unfolding before us. We passed between the looming bulks of the Bells (Maroon and West Maroon) and Pyramid Peak, all three “fourteeners” (mountains over 14,000’, 53 of the US’ total 96 residing in Colorado and, due to their immense size, will be difficult for another state to try and steal), leaving behind the dense forest for the idyllic mountain valley beyond. There was a sense of being cradled by the towering mountain ridges bordering either side of us. The green expanse extending out in front of us was a welcome and inviting change of pace and we set into it with gusto. 

Not long after, we made our first stream crossing over one of Crater Lake's feeders, the West Maroon Creek, which snakes through the heart of the Maroon Zone. We stripped off our shoes and socks and waded through the fairly gentle (and unfairly chilly) current of high-alpine meltwater, a soothing numbness following the initial spine-tingling jolt of the cold. We grabbed a drink and tried our best to dry our feet before them back into socks, jamming the slightly soggy package back into our hiking shoes. 

From there, we progressed steadily up the valley's gradual slope and, before we knew it, found ourselves looking back on the lake receding into the distance behind us. As if seeing it again summoned the water's spirit and we found our path, yet again, beset by that of the creek. As we were further up, closer to the snow-capped source and the steepening slope driving its descent, the formerly babbling brook had become a wide, quick-moving torrent. After briefly searching above and below our intersection point for a spot where the fording might be easier, we admitted defeat and plunged across right there. Stepping methodically, using our poles for additional stability, we carefully inched across, doing our best to prevent a plunge that would mean days (or at least hours) of soaked gear. With temps dropping for the night, that would've spelled a rather unpleasant evening and downright miserable sleep. Luckily, trail magic waved its wand in our favor and we avoided major calamity, soon basking in the sun gratefully on the opposite bank.

Following this crossing, the grade increased as the climb up West Maroon Pass truly began. We slogged upwards, dipping in and out of tree stands and up gravelly slopes, ascending further and further up the valley. As time passed and the sun started to dip lower towards the ridgeline, talk began to circulate in the group on where to set camp for the night. There were a few recommended spots marked on the map but we weren't exactly sure what (or who) we might find when we got there. Serendipitously, we came across a ranger who was ground-truthing reported campsites along the route and, after checking our permits to make sure we were worthy of such precious info, helped verify that there were, in fact, several spots ahead that might be able to accommodate a group of our size. 

Chance would deal us another interesting hand as we reached the first of the larger spots and found it filled… with two old friends from college and their dads. After a quick catch-up, we left them to enjoy their rest and search for a site to do the same. After another half hour or so of climbing, we came across the next set of sites and found just that. Dropping our packs and scouring the area, we were able to find a suitable amount of space to pitch our three tents and the one hopefully not far behind with the Cams. We were split between two side-by-side knolls, both overlooking the valley below and West Maroon Pass looming ahead of us. The views were stunning no matter which direction you looked and we leaned into it, exploring the area around our camp and, in my case, snapping pictures of our surroundings nearly as fast as my shutter would allow.

After we'd all gotten a chance to chill out for a minute, we got down to the important tasks still at hand: fetching and filtering water from the nearby stream, prepping for dinner, sending out check-in texts to our loved ones with my sat device, and breaking into the handle of whiskey that Ben figured was an effective use of packing space for a 4 day, 29-mile journey. This task seemed the most pressing and essential to survival, so was tackled first (mommy texts came in a close second lol). 

With camp set up and our spirits and stomachs warmed by that sweet brown, we realized we had a bit of an issue. Unsure of how far behind (if at all) Jones and McInnes were and without a lick of service to find out or to relay our location to them, we weren't sure how they were supposed to find us, especially tucked off the trail in the surrounding brush as we were. It was a stumper for sure and nobody wanted to sit out at the turnoff indefinitely as the camp bouncer, so we decided on creating a flag using my orange tent stuff sack and a line of fluorescent string leading from the trail towards our campsite. The spontaneous icing on the cake was a crude "Cam" made out of rocks at the base of the gently waving bag, a truly personal red (orange) carpet. 

It wasn't long after settling back down, satisfied, that our masterful web caught its prey! Some rustling from the trail prompted a call out for our lost Cams, and that cry was enthusiastically returned. The reunion was swift and joyous, that is until they revealed they hadn't seen a bit of our alluring display and we kicked them to the trail and told those ungrateful bastards to find their own place to sleep. Well… no, we didn't do that (mainly just felt silly that we spent the time and effort for not), but perhaps we should have! All jokes aside, it felt like a miracle that they'd made it there at all, especially once they'd settled down and told us the tale of their adventure.

Cam picked up Cam from the airport a bit before noon and immediately started hightailing it towards the trailhead, about 4 hours away. They had a little wiggle room on timing, but any little setback, for example, Jones' turbocharger blowing, might very well be the end of them. And like any good Chekhov gun, that baby fired before they'd even made it halfway to Aspen, leaving the Camwagon disabled the boys stranded with the clock ticking. But with the brainpower of not one but TWO Cams at their disposal, they were able to square with their situation and move with haste to keep the dream alive. One Cam called a tow truck to haul away his hunk of junk (informing the driver that time was of the essence and that he'd just leave the keys hidden to make the pickup) while the other rolled the bones with a mid-mountains Uber call (surely not a proposition with a high chance of success). 

But those boys must have helped some old ladies with some groceries or a handful of stuck cats out of trees that week because Karma was on their side and their Fairy Godmother arrived soon after in the form of a heavyset gamer, ready and willing to drive them the remaining 2 1/2 hours out to the trail. And as it turns out, the Cams were his saving grace too. He broke down in tears not long after they'd entered his sedan and admitted that he'd been through a pretty tough stretch lately and desperately needed this ride to make ends meet. Unbeknownst to him, his luck was poised to improve even further: the boys sharing with him a taste of some especially choice jerky. Wordlessly, he made it VERY clear he would like to have quite a bit more, but in great personal sacrifice, understood it would be needed by his godsent passengers for the days of trekking ahead. A few hours of hilarity later, our heroes arrived safely there and set out hot on our tails, ripping up the miles like bodybuilders in phonebook emporium. And more than just pure brawn & motor, this veritable Holmes and Watson deftly decoded the clues of our passage, sniffed out mere whispers of our scent, and tapped into the very nature of investigative intuition to track us down (oh, and a tip off from our friends further down the valley didn’t hurt). As the sun dipped nearly to the ridgeline, they came triumphantly upon our camp.

Now that the party had been made a bit closer to whole (and as whole as most of us assumed it would ever be, given the bee calamity progressing ambiguously back in the Mile High City), we decided to celebrate over some freeze-dried goodness (which we admittedly would've done anyways if they hadn't shown up, but in decidedly worse spirits). Since we part way up the pass already and above the 10,800 ft fire restriction, we did so huddled around a small, inflatable, solar light (so romantic!!). The whiskey was passed and we traded stories as darkness fell, enjoying its warmth and that of each other's company. There may have been some lingering subconscious resentments over their close call though, as I soon stood and "accidentally" tripped over a root, plunging headfirst into McInnes’ lap, the added bulk snapping one of his new (and highly anticipated) camp chair's legs. Luckily, we'd packed some “toughen up” in our medical bag and he was able to swallow enough to settle back onto the unforgiving but "better than the ground" seat of his bear canister lid. The rest of the evening progressed without incident and, after rough plans were made for the next morning, we retired one by one to the shelter of our tents and soon were all asleep.

Day 2

When the dawn broke on the second day, I awoke feeling a bit worn out. Maybe it was the stressful days of preparation, maybe the hike up there, maybe the altitude (almost certainly the whiskey contributed), but whatever it was it would need to wear off fast because we had our longest, most strenuous day ahead of us of over 10 miles and 2 grueling mountain pass climbs. But rather than focus on that, we turned our attention to the positives: that we were already part way up West Maroon Pass, that the group was miraculously over 75% together (that’s a passing grade!), and that all meteorological signs were pointing to this being a marvelous day for a jaunt through the wilderness. 

Not that we were in any rush to get started! We took our time making breakfast and some much-needed coffee, filtering water from the nearby stream, and just taking in the views. Once we felt as if we had killed enough time, we packed up camp and threw on our packs, exchanging a couple of fist bumps as we set out for our first full day on the trail.

Initially, we passed through a section of dense head/chest-high bushes (depending on where you fell on the scale of Meg to Mac) but that quickly died away as we rose into the wide-open, wildflower-dotted high-alpine meadow above. Those who have spent much time in Colorado before know that there is a very tight window in between when the winter snowpack has melted away and the grass has time to revive itself for a brief few weeks before it is inevitably baked a yellowish brown by the relentless beating of the sun. And, baby, we were shooting that gap like Skywalker through the Meridian trench! The bright, healthy green of that meadow, particularly contrast against the reddish maroon rocks the Bells were named for, was downright stunning. It just made you feel as if we were in some sort of fairytale wonderland, far too good for the likes of our motley crew. But there it was, all the same! 

We stopped just to marvel at the sight on more than one occasion…. or was it that we just needed a rest from the thinning air and progressively steeper climb? Either way, the result was the same: we hiked, we ran out of breath, we stopped, we marveled, rinse and repeat. And before we knew it, grassy slopes had turned to rocky scree and we rounded the last few switchbacks to the top of West Maroon Pass.

The view on either side of this precipice was stunning. From the pass’ vantage, we were able to look both back down on our cozy camping spot far below and the idyllic valley that awaited us ahead on the other side. This dual vista had us spinning like tops and we likely would have stood there all afternoon rotating, jaws agape, until we were nearly dizzy enough to fall right off if it wasn't for one small catch. It was BUSY. As this pass is accessible as part of a moderate day hike and our start certainly couldn't be confused with that of the early bird (no worms for us), it felt like everyone and their mother was up there! Even after finding our little pocket to sit down and break for a quick snack, we were still practically lying on top of each other like walruses fighting over limited real-estate on a small Arctic Ocean outcrop. 

The final straw came when some lady asked me to be her surrogate “Karen” and ask some kids further along the ridgeline to "turn their damn electrobop music down". To be fair, I'm no big fan of people bumping speakers out on a hike, but given the near carnival-like atmosphere of the pass, it was a bit of a free-for-all. If you want to put an end to it, at least do your own dirty work! After begrudgingly accepting and sullying the spirit of the youth, we decided it was time to go, reshouldering our packs and beginning our descent.

As no surprise to anyone who has ever hiked, the trek down was far quicker and easier than the path up, even having to keep all that extra weight on our backs from sending us head over heels down the quick and painful way. In under thirty minutes, we were at the junction between the West Maroon Trail #1970 and our prescribed path, the North Fork Crystal River Trail, which we would take into the North Fork Zone and eventually to our side adventure campsite at Geneva Lake. At this point, there were quite a few miles and another mountain pass standing in between us and our mattress pad repose, and as if on cue, a few sirens came along to shake our resolve. 

As we stood chatting and snacking at the fork, a group of four or five people jauntily skipped down from the trail we'd just traveled and stopped briefly to gush about their plans: to take the small remaining amount of the other route to the East Fork trailhead where a bus was waiting to ferry them down into Crested Butte. Once there, they were going to hit up Secret Stash Pizza and gorge themselves on hot and tasty pies before retiring to their AirBnB for a few beers and a relaxing soak in its hot tub before tucking into some nice, real beds… ummmmm wtf? The stunned silence following their joyous departure spoke what we were all thinking: 'Have we chosen the undeniably wrong adventure?!??' Whatever the answer, our die had been cast. Shaken, but resigned to our fate, we set off once again, bullheadedly trying to convince ourselves that these casuals "just didn't get it".

As if sensing our flagging spirits, the trail worked its magic once again and blessed us for our blind faith in backwoods exploration. This reward came in the form of Purity Basin (very aptly named). Although the entire extent of the Loop was akin to walking through one postcard vista after the next, this gently rising and falling section of serene high-alpine meadow teeming with a stunning array of brilliantly colored wildflowers and fringed by rugged mountain peaks was the one on the rack that makes you say, "YES!! This is the one that I have been looking for. This is the one I will send to my grandma and that she will display proudly on her fridge for years to come." And even after you check the price and find that it is almost 5x as expensive as the others ("$3 for a postcard?!??") you still go ahead and buy it without the slightest hint of regret. 

The trail meandering through this veritable paradise invited us to come relax, enjoy ourselves, and flirt with an awe-triggered cardiac arrest. And as I reached out my hands to graze the larkspurs, alpine sunflowers, owl's-claws, and starry umbels of cow parsnip, I wondered if the latter had occurred and I was now a Russel Crowe clone sauntering through The Elysian Fields. A sudden and awkward stumble that I barely caught before finding out if these flowers tasted as good as they looked was enough to ensure me that I was, in fact, not in Heaven, just somewhere awfully close. This near dream continued for the next half hour and I probably averaged 3-4 "oh… wow…"s per minute, bringing the grand total to likely somewhere around a hundred (take that hot-tubbers). But all good things must come to an end at some point and we soon found ourselves approaching Frigid Air Pass.

Leaving behind the emerald garden of Purity, we trekked on a still rather shockingly green stretch but one with sadly fewer flowers (woe is us). The path angled more or less straight towards the massive bulk of a sheer, scree-topped ridgeline and we puzzled at exactly what the trail's plan was for us. I mean, that baby was looming a solid 500+ feet over us and there didn't seem to be much ground to make up before we were supposed to be up over the pass tucked only 100 feet below it to the right. And as we got close enough to see around the extended outcrop that had been blocking our view, we discovered that the plan was simple: more-or-less just go straight up.

So, without any better ideas, we rounded the little sludgy pond of snowmelt at the foot of the pass and started up, up, up the steep ascent. Even though the ground got a little loose and I was briefly reduced to all fours a few times as it got especially steep, I realized that the visual perception of it had made a mountain out of a molehill (or more accurately a steep mountain pass). All in all, the hot and fast climb was one of the easier (or dare I say, easiest?!) of the whole trip but hey, I've always been partial to a sprint, so a take to take with a grain of salt.

But fast it was, the fleetest of foot up it in less than 15 minutes time. Those taking the lead, as we would become increasingly accustomed to, were Ironman Ben and Trailmaster McInnes (I pulled a bronze. Nothing special but still a little more hardware for Momma Gotsch's mantle). One way or another, I would've crawled up a pass twice as long and steep for the view over the top: Maroon Peak front and center, towering over the seemingly endless green expanse of Fravert Basin which funneled gently between the embrace of parallel ridgelines and turned out of sight to the northeast, following path of the North Fork Crystal River. 

And despite the chilly name, the air temperature was pleasant and the sun shone warmly down on our sweaty skin. We were about ready to set up shop there and get our tan on (or burn in my case), but it was nearly 1 o'clock and the clouds heading towards us were taking on an ominous pallor. None of us were particularly keen on the idea of being struck by lightning so, if the rapidly darkening and quickly approaching clouds were any indication of one of the violent thunderstorms typical of Colorado summer afternoons, we wanted to be down from high ground as quickly as possible. So down into Fravert we descended!

It's a wonder what the threat of a couple hundred million volts of electricity can do to energize a group and we descended that next mile as quickly as the flash that would have roasted us on the spot (the steep downslope of the trail and the promise of a stop for lunch didn't hurt either). Once we'd made it into the gentler grade of the basin and away from the worst of the danger, the sun broke through again and it seemed as if the dark gray of the clouds were a bit of a false flag (cumulonimbus posers!) and we slowed our pace a bit. 

After crossing a small creek and once again dipping below the tree line, we decided we'd earned a rest and set up on a fallen log for a little backcountry picnic. Those who had laughed at the baguette (not anyone, really, but any criticism would've been well-deserved) weren't laughing anymore as I broke open a few crusty lengths for myself & McInnes (Jones and I were on food duty for the big-city boy) and loaded her up with cured red wine salami and some hard parmesan. Admittedly, it was a bit dry, but, damn, did it go down smooth all the same. We sat and basked in the weightlessness of pack-free life, the joys of the trail, & each other's fine company.

Relaxed and rejuvenated, it was time to set out once again in the direction of Geneva Lake. We descended deeper into Fravert Basin, dipping in and out of stands of spruce and fir, between clumps of alder and willow, and through gentle fields of white and yellow wildflowers. Off to our right as we walked, we could hear the early gurgling of the North Fork Crystal River rise in volume and intensity as the slope increased, more runs of snowmelt from the peaks above joining the torrent heading downstream. The crescendo reached its peak as the now-rapids came upon a sudden drop-off, sending the water cascading down a steep set of cliffs to the valley below. 

This precipice also meant the opening of the tree cover, affording a scenic vantage point over the land stretching out ahead. The waterfall ran out into an array of small ponds before the river's path continued further down the basin, cutting a light green swath of smaller riparian growth through the darker, dense cover of assorted conifers. This whole scene was ringed by stark, rocky peaks, patches of snow still clinging to their shaded higher aspects. This vista, perfectly framed by a pair of evergreens, seemed to beg to be the backdrop for a group picture and we, magnanimously, obliged. Once the deed was done, we realized that our photo op had attracted the attention of a local marmot, who stared up at us in quiet reproach (and possible terror) for not inviting him to partake.

Now that we had the pics to prove that it HAD in fact happened (take that, doubters), it was time to press on. The trail turned sharply to the left and dipped back into the trees beneath the ragged, red shale crags of Frigid Air Pass' ridgeline which loomed now directly ahead of us. Tasked with delivering us safely down to the basin's floor, the path broke into a set of switchbacks that cut through the woods and leveled the pitch enough that we didn't have to take the hard way down that the plummeting water had (“You thinking what I'm thinking!? Aim for the bushes.” We got any The Other Guys fans in the house?). We were soon out into the fields below and got a magnificent straight-on view of King Falls' 300-foot tumble down the rocks above. Tucked against the riverbed, there were a few campsites that looked mighty inviting to our tiring legs, but our permit specified that we were to carry onwards to the Geneva Lake Zone several miles ahead, so we obliged.

Not long after, we found the water's path bisecting ours, and as the polite hikers that we are, we took the high road and decided to cross rather than demand it change course. Kicking off our hiking shoes and peeling sweaty, silt-covered socks off our equally sweaty dogs, we waded into the icy current and navigated carefully across. Surprisingly, its bitter chill felt so good on our sore feet that, upon reaching the opposite bank, we crunched the numbers and extrapolated that it might feel good on the rest of us too. So, in the spirit of the scientific method, we stripped down to our skivvies and tested this hypothesis by plunging back in. At first, our theory was very nearly disproved. The cold water sent an angry army of pins and needles careening across our skin and a seemingly advanced case of rapid-onset ice cream headache straight to the noggin (sans rocky road, this is bordering on criminal).

But as the initial freeze subsided, the cold became invigorating and our aching muscles welcomed the numbing sensation slowly setting in (and our tentmates no doubt welcomed the reduction in future stank brought on by the closest thing we'd had to a bath in days). Comfortable now that the Mythbusters would be able to label our experiment's expected outcome as at least "Plausible", we exited the river shivering but thoroughly refreshed. Next to our abandoned packs and heaps of discarded clothing, we rejoiced in the warmth of the sun and of certified scientific vindication.

Once sufficiently dry, we hopped back into our clothes and, as fate would have it, ran into a middle-aged pair of hikers who we'd joked around in the parking lot with the day before. They had been hiking the loop in the opposite direction so it had only been a matter of time before we ran into them and here they were at last! We exchanged greetings in the fake names we'd given each other (long story haha) and shared some tales of our respective journeys thus far, giving a glorious little glimpse of what was still in store for us. The clouds of bugs swarming us were starting to get pretty bad though (an unfortunate case of foreshadowing) so we wished them luck and set off away from the river's edge. The trail gently descended deeper into the basin, passing through pleasant high alpine meadows with the North Fork Crystal twisting along to our left. Our tired legs and backs were grateful for the easy going, but we knew that with the start of Trail Rider's ascent waiting for us just a mile from our swimming hole, the honeymoon would be over soon. 

As a self-proclaimed "map head", I'd checked out the route over lunch and noted that our climb up this first half of the pass until our turnoff towards Geneva Lake was going to send us up over 1,100ft in elevation in just a mile… that's damn steep in the best of times. I had decided to keep those specifics to myself lest it shatter the morale of the more exhausted among us and perhaps result in all-out mutiny (which, of course, I'd swiftly quash with an iron fist, but who has the time?!??), instead opting to more vague descriptions of "a tough one" or "a real burner of a climb". 

Unfortunately, the topo map lived up to the hype, sending us more or less straight upwards. Progress was pretty stop-and-go characterized by periods of heads down huffing and puffing, stopping waiting for stragglers (and our heart rates to recede from caffeinated-hummingbird levels), then pushing on again. I'm fairly sure nobody in their right mind would be dying for a picture taken of them as they struggle up this grueling uphill, but luckily our group was composed of a bunch of psychos and they seemed more than happy to oblige.

Then after what felt like eons (but was only an hour), we straggled one-by-one to the fork in the trail and stumbled across a little stream to the rocky rest area. My head felt like a cross between the Airheads mascot and a baked potato hot out the oven and the pair of gents up there already felt the same (you know who I'm talking about, the same ol' peloton). So, after dropping packs, we sought to remedy that by one-by-one ostriching our heads down into the icy flow. This is truly the "get rich quick scheme" of cooling off because in a matter of hyperventilation-inducing seconds, my core temp had dropped some 10 odd degrees and I was ready to lie back and enjoy a touch of rest. 

Options for this respite were limited, but luckily there was an adorable little marmot there to demonstrate just how close a field of boulders could be to a Mattress King showroom. We kicked it cuddly critter style and looked back out down the valley we just came up from as it curled around Devil's Rockpile in front of us down into Lead King Basin (with hardened names like that we were glad we'd ridden the trail up Trail Rider instead of that ominous alternate route).

Soon, the whole group had made it up to the junction. With the shadows growing longer and energy levels dwindling in proportion, we decided it was best not to linger there for long and to just push the final mile onwards to Geneva Lake. After all that climbing, the mainly downhill slope of this stretch of trail was a welcome reprieve. The sights weren't too shabby either, walking along sunflower-dotted slopes that fell off to wide-open vistas of distant snowcapped peaks. This then gave way to a lush spruce-ringed pasture with the appropriately named Meadow Mountain rising behind it. Knowing that this peak provided the rocky backdrop for Geneva Lake's far side, our pace quickened as the promise of camp & a hot meal was quite literally right around the bend. 

And just as the AllTrails prophecy foretold, we emerged from the forest to find the shimmering body of turquoise tucked down to our left amidst a bouquet of multicolored wildflowers. And we moved towards this awaiting stage like an oversized funk band (one of those big jam bands with a whole brass section and a set of synchronized two-stepping backup singers or something, lord knows we were scruffy enough to fit the bill), the spotlight of the sun's waning rays highlighting us as it dipped low towards the ridgeline. And like any good band, our fans waited with eager and enthusiastic anticipation. But unlike the normal cheers and shouts of your average crowd, the diehard swarm that engulfed us was more of a buzzing, biting crowd. You might have guessed from that description, but this alpine lake was ABSOLUTELY TEEMING with mosquitos. This was an unwelcome, though not entirely unexpected, development, but we were almost too tired to care. Ignoring them for now, we scouted the area and without too much effort, found a suitable campsite about to the east side of Geneva and set up shop.

Once tents were up, we figured that the lake itself required a little bit of exploration despite the spawning stronghold that was no doubt based there. And though this turned out to be exactly the case, their incessant nagging did little to take away from the beauty of this place. The water’s surface rippled gently from the breeze coming in from the south, distorting the mirrored image of the grassy slope standing resolutely in front of us. Off to our right, the basin that fed into Geneva was overrun by dense jade thickets with darker stands of evergreen. Flows of scree and ragged cliffs cut into this viridescent carpet and rose to a crown of staggering apexes, the bulky spine of Hagerman Peak and the sprawling expanse of Snowmass Mountain behind its crown jewels. We lounged on a patch of lakeside boulders like a couple of rich ladies at the club pool but, devoid of drinks service, we drank in the view instead.

Figuring we might as well take a dip while we still had the light and waded across the muddy bottom to a spot deep enough to plunge. It was as cold as before, but we were warmed by the last little stretch of sunlight and the knowledge that we were finally out of miles to hike for the day. In the spirit of this celebration, we headed back up the small goat path to camp and toasted with swigs from one of the water bottle subdivisions of Ben's handle (classy, classy). Realizing that the buzzing horde around us might be after just that, our buzz, we quickly covered up with some layers and the head nets that Cam J had procured for the group (yes, they looked just as cool as you'd imagine).

Getting down to the business of dealing with our rising hunger, the first step was getting into our bear canisters. Now this sounds easier than it really is in practice. These things don't exactly come with instructions… well, maybe they do, but I bought mine second hand the day before (shout out to Cassie for accepting online payment and hiding it out in the woods for me to scoop on the way out haha). Regardless, they require an astonishing amount of finger strength and more ingenuity than your average bear. Well actually, that there's the issue, it's not about what your average bear could figure out, but in fact what methods the smartest bear might employ to get at your goodies. The gap between that particularly cere-bear-al (I’m insufferable, I know) fellow and, say, your friend who you're impressed when he gets both his shoes on the correct feet is so razor thin that Gillette has poured millions into studying it further. Long way to say: "these things can be a pain in the ass to open, and especially frustrating when you're hungry and can see what you want to eat merely millimeters away but can't seem to be able to break into this blue plastic prison". But, hey, I've never been one to miss up on an opportunity for a long-winded diatribe about virtually nothing.

Once that was taken care of, out came our array of backpacking stoves, and soon water was boiling for our freeze-dried feasts. Once poured in and sealed, we kept our tired gaze on the packages as if blank stares were the miraculous secret ingredient for reduced cooking time. After what felt like eons, but was probably no more than 7 minutes (if that, I sincerely doubt most of us waited the full time), we were happily shoveling sporkfuls of recently-rehydrated beef stroganoff or chicken & dumplings under stylish bug screens into eager maws. It was salty, sure, but it was hot and after a day of burning calories by the truckload, it might as well have been Michelin-starred. After bags had been emptied (and practically licked clean), the weariness that had long since permeated our muscles and bones now found its way to our brains. It took about all I could muster to not collapse from the top of my bear canister throne and pass out right there on dirt (and some among us were almost at that step, having forgone the seated stage and instead taken their place at the dinner circle lying flat on mattress pads). 

Before long, the last traces of alpenglow disappeared from the surrounding peaks and darkness fell around Geneva Lake. While some days don't seem to go long enough, this one had long since overflowed with pleasure and we were all content to see it end. As we all silently agreed to let it do just that and prepared for bed, it surprised us with one last cherry to place on top of this veritable ice cream sundae of a day: learning that Jones had decided that fresh pits were crucial enough to warrant taking up some of his & McInnes' limited bear canister space with deodorant (a full-sized one, no less!). After snapping a pic so he couldn’t later deny this backcountry blunder and stashing the containers away from camp, we slipped into bed and giggled ourselves to sleep (though all secretly jealous of their tent’s fresh and clean odor, at least in the armpit region).

Day 3

Given the long hike the day before, we let ourselves sleep in a bit that morning. It’s not often that backpacking mattress pads and luxuriating come up in the same breath but, with sore bodies and plausibly mosquito-related blood deficiencies, we lounged on those inch-thick layers of plastic and air as if they were a sea of adorable, cuddly, little kittens (minus the purring and inherent animal welfare concerns). When the sunlight finally crested the surrounding peaks to our little cache of tents and made it impossible to ignore the day any longer, we emerged to find ourselves once more nestled in that picturesque mountain valley under a clear blue sky. Stretching and taking in the view, we thanked weather god Al Roker for again delivering us ideal conditions for a day on the trail. However, he did very little to reduce the flying parasite infestation (thanks Al…) so my companions and I were eager to move along. Under the cover of our head nets (even more flattering in the radiant morning light), we made a quick breakfast and packed up camp, planning on a more leisurely coffee and snack break back up at the Trail Rider ascent junction. 

Saddling our gear and pushing through the always shocking first few minutes of uphill (‘was my pack really this heavy yesterday?!’) we got back into the groove and reached the fork in under a half hour. There to greet us was the Zen Master marmot from the day before, briefly stopping to note our approach before pulling some brush across the trail for its burrow hidden somewhere in the talus field (well, odds are it wasn’t the exact same one… but with a Planet-Earth-inspired narrative vision, we’re going with it). And in the spirit of his teachings, we dropped our burdens and eased into a little rock-top relaxation & reflection. And why not? We were in no real hurry, with the lightest itinerary of the trip ahead of us, only about 3.5 miles left to Snowmass Lake. I mean, hell, we could have managed to crawl all the way there with the time we had left in the day (though our hands and knees were relieved to find that we didn’t intend to put that sentiment to the test). So, we chilled, kicked back, filtered some water, and made some cups of joe to enjoy the view over. And as if our devotion to this breezy attitude had pleased some meditative spirit of the universe, we were rewarded with the most unexpectedly wonderful surprise of all: the triumphant trio of Teddy, Luke, and Kenobi.

By this point, we’d all pretty much counted them out, unfortunate casualties in the vicious onslaught of the dastardly honeybee. At best, they would have had to start a day behind and so even in our more hopeful moments, we’d guessed they might end up linking up with us for the final night at Snowmass. You can therefore imagine our shock and joy as they suddenly emerged from out of the thickets across the creek that we’d come up through the previous evening! The reunion was a raucous affair (not exactly Zen, but who could blame us!) and Kenobi, tail flailing enthusiastically, immediately went to work on improving/worsening (??) the crew’s general cleanliness with a barrage of eager kisses. After the excited greetings were through, they regaled us in an impressive (read: unenviable) tale of the marathon day from the trailhead all the way into Fravert Basin that they’d churned out the day before and their early start up Trail Rider that morning with hopes of at some point catching up to us. It was as if our lackadaisicality had matched perfectly with their industriousness to bring about our reunification, truly a sign from the Trail Gods as to the just nature of our cause! 

Now, in spirits even higher than those backing us, we set back out on our quest, finally as a whole. From the junction, the trail initially continued the upward trajectory we knew (and cursed) from the day before, but after a half mile it decided that we deserved some casual walking time with our newfound companions & tapered off to a gentle slope into a valley covered in a lush, wildflower-dotted carpet punctuated by a prolific set of rocky outcroppings and rugged cliffs. Our path turned briefly to the east, providing us with a sightline out to Maroon and North Maroon peaks before they were hidden behind the ridgeline rising in front of us, then swung back northwards to face it. 

Ahead of us, we could see the little thread of dirt we were to walk carved through the verdant landscape up to its base then turn to the left and climb up the remaining grassy slope before tucking over a knoll and out of sight. Though we couldn’t see the trail’s full extent, we could now infer where we were to go, the route boxed in by the ridgeline rising to the peaks of Snowmass & Hagerman. The clear remaining choice was up the talus field beneath them and to the “low” point down to their right. From our vantage point below, it looked like a steep and unwelcoming climb, but our legs were fresh (well, maybe not Luke & Teddy’s, but they’d manage) and the tranquil surroundings soothed any misgivings.

We followed the single meandering fault through this otherwise pristine terrain, passing by a small reed-fringed pond and weaving through patches of boulders nestled into the dense vegetation. I stopped periodically along the way, shooting pictures of the landscape and my compatriots, but no matter how beautiful the shots came out, I was sure they’d never match up with what my eyes were taking in around me (a suspicion that, despite the images’ stunning quality, would be later confirmed in post). We turned to the north and climbed over the slope between us and the pass’ base and found that our suspicions were, thankfully, only partially true. 

What we had picked out as Trail Rider’s summit was in fact that, but rather than a straight-up push, the trail cut its path diagonally up the scree field’s face then switched back twice to the ridge, extending the length of the climb but mercilessly cutting its otherwise brutal slope. Not to say it wasn’t still a bit of a slog, they all have moments where you question what the heck you’ve done to put yourself in such a needlessly strenuously position (though that’s sometimes exactly what I set out for), but it was far from unmanageable at any point. Kenobi provided an unexpected x-factor, occasionally weaving in and out of our legs on his relentless and excited path up and down the slope, torn between his thirst for adventure and the desire to be close to Mom or Dad’s side as they made their ascent, which was far more adorable than it was a nuisance.

In little time, we were at the top of Trail Rider and we were once again treated to the dual view afforded by each of these passes: the sprawling overview of the area through which we’d just trekked and the novel sights of the new world spread out ahead. I always find it fascinating to get that overhead perspective on the path I’ve traveled, providing new depth and perspective to the dips, turns, and climbs I just passed through. Equally, I love the mystery and adventure of an unfamiliar landscape ahead, marveling at the new sights and trying to best spot and predict the route through it. Which is better is anyone’s guess & I hardly doubt it matters, but never been one to pass up a chance to flap my gums! 

In any case, from our vantage point, we could take in and marvel at both, an exercise in catching our breath after the climb and subsequently losing it again over our stunning surroundings. It also struck as a spot we could sit our butts down and tuck into some well-earned snacks, so we did just that. It was nice to finally be summiting one of the passes as a complete group and we basked in each other’s newfound company over various bars, nuts, dried fruits, and cured meats.

This tided us over for a time, but before long the tantalizing jewel of Snowmass Lake tucked down in the basin below us became too much to resist. Her deep blue waters called to us, offering chilly respite from our sweat-soaked clothes (complementary sunbathing included, free of charge, on the nearby shore) and we were powerless to deny her any longer. We rose and shook out stiff joints before setting back out along the trail carved into the Snowmass Peak’s flank. As my comrades began the crisscross down its gravelly switchbacks, I found myself quickly falling back. The incredible vantage point over the valley and the peaks and ridgelines of the Elk Range ringing it in screamed to be admired and my camera and I dutifully obliged. 

When my incessant shutter finger was satisfied, I was lucky enough to find that my hometown crew, Luke & the Cams, had hung back to wait for me. Now, the four of us got a chance to relive the days of our youth, substituting the streets of small-town Massachusetts for the dirt path of the Maroon Bells Wilderness (not easily comparable, but I’d say a marked improvement). Talk of past, present, and future flowed enthusiastically as we descended from the rocky slopes to the floor below. There to meet us were wide swaths of wildflowers and the occasional remnant of last season's snowpack, still somehow clinging to solid state even now in August. 

Winding our way through it, I was overwhelmed with gratitude. Not only for yet another breathtaking landscape to hike through but that, after a month of planning and despite unforeseen complications, we had all managed to make it out to enjoy the adventure together in the end. Sometimes the moment you are “living the dream” is overlooked until it’s already passed you by, but luckily, this wasn’t one of those times. I was able to fully drink it all in and capture it with another quick shot from my Fuji. 

Soon we came across the rest of the party, who were stopped ahead at an overlook of Snowmass Lake. The patch of dirt that they were standing on was by no means official but had been worn down by thousands of hikers who had come before us, stepping a few feet off the trail to marvel at the pristine body of water that lay picturesquely below. So as those before us, we stood and we marveled. But as lovely as it looked, a dip beneath its clear blue surface sounded even more so to our sweat-and-silt-coated crew. The idea took hold and before long, we were departing from beneath the rocky cliffs and heading in the direction of our cleansing cold plunge. 

We descended through a patch of trees that turned towards the lake and opened up for half a second to perfectly frame Snowmass Peak and a touch of the lake below (a sleeper pick for one of the coolest pics of the trip), before cutting back and dropping down to a field of large boulders that appeared to have slid down over the years from the ridgeline above us. 

We picked our way methodically through them, especially careful while passing through a band of snow still burrowed in their midst (still over 9 miles and a mountain pass from the trailhead, it’s no place to turn an ankle). Slow and steady was the name of the game and in the end, it won the race (as prophesied!), each member of the party crossing without calamity. We close enough where we could almost taste the lunch awaiting us, and in about 10 minutes we had pushed through the final stretch of densely vegetated trail and arrived at the lake’s bank. 

We dropped our packs and briefly explored our surroundings before our stomachs got the best of us and we reconvened in a makeshift picnic area by the shore. We broke into our bear canisters (not always easy as the gap between the smartest bear and dumbest human is surprisingly thin) and polished off the remainder of our lunch supplies (bon voyage, my sweet baguette). Once our appetites were properly sated, we shirked the advice of poolside parents everywhere and decided it was time for a swim, 30-minute waiting period be damned! 

All it took was one toe in the water to realize that the “refreshing” dip we had in mind was going to be a bit more of a clinical trial on the effects of hypothermia on tired hikers, but we weren’t deterred (no surprise given our track record over the past few days). Rapidly sucking and blowing breath like Wim “The Iceman” Hof impersonators, we forged ahead into the icy depths. The water wasn’t getting any warmer so, counting ourselves down to force the issue, we dove on in. The initial shock of submersion lit up every synapse in the "get the hell out of there!!!" region of the brain, but like the stubborn, Type-2-fun folk we are, we ignored this reasonable advice. In short measure, our persistence was rewarded. That prehistoric flight instinct, realizing it was falling on deaf ears, grudgingly subsided, giving way to a mild euphoria and an unshakable sense that we were very much alive. Not only had we been trekking through the woods with everything we needed to survive like nomadic hunter-gatherers of old (disregard the wildly different gear), but here we were braving the elements in an utterly breathtaking setting (excuse the double entendre). The line separating the deeply real and surreal doesn’t get much hazier than this.

Now, while we all secretly wanted to prove we could bear this cold the longest (a competition adjacent to the tough-to-open-jar test of strength), our hopes were soon brutally dashed against the unshakeable rock that was (IS!) Andrea Hewett. In stark contrast to our rapid hyperventilation and chattering teeth, her expression was unstrained, tranquil even, as she lounged back in the recent meltwater like it was a bubble bath. I waited longer than most, hoping to see a crack in what I imagined might just be an elaborate facade, but was ultimately dismayed. She seemed to get only more comfortable as time passed and showed no signs of leaving any time soon. Unable to keep up in this trial of wills, I plodded on numb feet back to shore, defeated. And as if to turn the screw, rather than return a conquering hero, she swam out even further. Screw Charlie Sheen and his “tiger blood”, this chick has freakin’ polar bear in her veins! If I’m going to go down, at least it felt right that it was to a worthy opponent (and that the “competition” was all just in my head anyway haha). 

After warming up on a rock and admiring the view, I retired back to our new campsite tucked back into the trees a bit further back from our lunch spot (gotta respect that >100ft from bodies of water rule, folks). We still had plenty of daylight left, this being the lightest itinerary of the trip, but the past days had caught up to us and we decided it was time to vegetate. I hung my hammock and collapsed gratefully into its nylon embrace, flanked on either side by the hammocks of Jones & the Meg/Helena duo. I half-heartedly tried to read my book but ended up mainly just chatting with my comrades and rocking contentedly. 

Out of reasonable tree choices but determined not to be left out of the swing fest, Luke showed up a bit later and pulled off a death-defying high hang. Entry wasn’t the most graceful of acts, but by God, he made it (and gave us a good laugh in the process). After a time, I noticed McInnes sitting on the ground atop just his thin mattress pad. Realizing that he’d be relaxing in a nice new camp chair had it not been for my clumsiness, I offered him my place as a token of apology. He accepted the olive branch and, as a result, can never hold that incident against me, ever (kidding, but later he did end up getting it replaced fo’ free sooooo… a victimless crime??). 

Unexpectedly, Teddy whipped out a bag of dice that she’d hauled along and a rousing game of liar’s dice broke out. Channeling our inner Bootstrap Bill (Dead Man’s Chest reference, anyone?), we attempted to deceive and root out the trickery of those whom we’d become all-too-familiar with over the past few days (easier said than done). Thoroughly engaged in the game, time slipped by quickly and, before we knew it, the sun had grown close to the peaks ringing in Snowmass Lake. In light of the fading light, we called it quits and headed back to the lakeshore to enjoy the last of those sweet rays. 

We soon learned that these waning beams were, in fact, a combination of sweet AND sour. As the ridgeline loomed almost 3,000 feet above us to the west, the sun was actually at quite a bit higher strength than you typically associate with sunset and those without hats or sunglasses bore the brunt of it. As I had both, I gave my hat to Cam M (now he DEFINITELY couldn’t be mad at me for the whole chair debacle). Ironically, he’d given it to me as a gift years ago as we headed off to college, so the argument could be made that I was only returning it to him… but that didn’t fit my above narrative so I quickly discarded it. Those not lucky enough to have had their seating crushed by my fall (poor souls) were left to shield their eyes and squint. 

In the direct line of this brilliant ball of burning gas’ fire, we also found ourselves heating up rather dramatically. A few of us popped our tops off to catch the last tanning (or in my case, burning) opportunity of the day. A few low-lying clouds robbed us of the chance to see the sun break the plane almost exactly at Snowmass Mountain’s apex. Contrite, they paid us back by casting a beautiful array of crepuscular rays, a veritable crown over the 14er’s summit.

The effect of the sun’s absence was immediately felt and those of us showing skin quickly reversed course. It was still nearly an hour before the sun truly set, so some of us decided to trek a bit down the creek that snaked from the lake’s east end. Still fresh off the meat of the melt season, the water rushed eagerly from the swollen lake and careened over a small set of falls before twisting down through the woods. We found our way out onto a large boulder in the middle of the creek's path and spent a quiet few minutes enjoying the sound of the rapids. Ultimately though, the view here was not as compelling as the one up above so we decided to head back up to watch the remainder of the day’s nature program.

We reconvened with the rest of the group on the lake’s edge and while our surroundings were now shaded, the sky was still a soft blue and the clouds were fringed in light. The dwindling light still played on the ridgeline to the southeast and we made bets on what aspect would see the last hints of alpenglow. Wordlessly, we cheered the mountain’s silhouette up the slope as if attending a silent Kentucky Derby Party (we were out in the wilderness, after all, had to show some decorum). As this veritable dark horse galloped upslope (let’s be real. more of a walk, trot at best), the light cloud cover overhead surprised us and released a light sprinkling of rain. While caught unprepared, it wasn’t hard enough to cause any alarm and the sporadic drops created a pleasing ripple effect across the lake’s surface. This pleasant little sunshower was short-lived, but enough to distract us from the last light race (not that we truly cared anyhow). We quietly enjoyed each other's company as twilight set in before retiring back to camp. Dinner was an uneventful affair and before long we all decided to turn in for the night.

Day 4

The alarm bells came early, urging our sore bodies up and out of the warmth of our sleeping bags. Usually, the overzealous optimism of the previous night’s AM expectations would draw mirthful chuckles and a dismissive eye-roll before hitting snooze (or turning it off entirely), but today was different. This morning, the pull of the early morning sun on our little alpine oasis was stronger than aching muscles or sleep-heavy lids. Even so, I would be hard-pressed to say dragging myself up was easy, just perhaps not near as excruciating as normal. Dawn’s bite was fresh, so I bundled up in sweats and a hooded fleece and unzipped the tent opening. I scooted myself to the tent’s edge and did the awkward shoe-slide-on-without-standing-or-getting-dirt-inside shuffle before pushing myself up and into our brisk little clearing. The sky had already taken on a navy blue, indicating that the sun’s rise had already begun off to the east, so I fished my camera out of its waterproof bag and hastened to the shore. 

Maneuvering down through the woods carefully and gently, still shaking the sleep’s memory from my foggy mind and careful not to disturb its ongoing presence in others still in their tents nearby, I made my way to the lake’s edge. There, my efforts were proved not for naught by the awaiting spectacle. Already a sliver of deep orange had alighted on the highest outcrops and had begun its crawl down the slope. Snowmass Lake was dark and glassy, creating an almost perfect mirror to reflect the view from above (as if once wasn’t enough!) After checking my glasses to make sure this double vision wasn’t a trick of the light or the result of a hit to the head in the night (I’m a snorer so I wouldn’t have completely blamed Piotr), I gawked at the otherworldly sight that now lay in front of me. Couldn’t help but think that no picture would be able to do this justice, but knowing I’d be kicking myself later if I hadn’t at least tried, I pulled the viewfinder to my eye and began shooting like a madman. 

Once several vantage points had been taken full advantage of and my trigger finger thoroughly exhausted, I figured the time had come to capture the view through the best camera of all, my eyes. I stood on a rock on the water’s edge, felt the refreshing chill of the early morning air, basked in the quiet stillness, and calmly took in the display unfolding on Snowmass’s face. As the sun rose higher and grew more luminous, the shadow cast by the ridgeline behind us descended lower, an inverse “curtains up” of sorts. With this rising, the orange tinge of the alpenglow began to burn off as the blue wavelengths scattered by the atmosphere at lower angles now found their mark, mixing with the reds to create a more normal, white light. In these young rays, the rocky cliffs and crags of the mountainside shone brightly, welcoming in the day. Given its visual intensity, it was hard to fathom how there were still patches of snow clinging to the higher elevations, but there they were! Their presence made the sight all the more dramatic and rugged, so I tipped my cap to their resilience. 

The crescendo of the morning’s performance now sure passed, I felt it was time was about time to address the rising rumble in my stomach. Before setting back, I filled up my filter bag from the stream to boil for my impending feast of dehydrated goodness & instant coffee (the Four Seasons got nothing on me) and with which to refill my supply for the day’s hike out. By the time I made it back to our little forest hollow, those whom I had not already seen down by the lakeshore were up rubbing the sleep from their eyes or stirring inside their tents, peering out at the day from behind its flaps. 

Little by little we reformed our informal circle and prepared our breakfasts. Unspoken but felt, the elephant in the room, was that this was likely to be our last formal meal of the trail. As much as we might have wished this not to be the case, the real world and its responsibilities were calling, and while this might not be the most attractive proposal, it was what it was and at least that life promised breakfasts that we not in a bag (and often oversalted). Kenobi whined in dismay at our predicament (more likely due to his confinement to a line stretched between two trees, but that doesn’t fit the narrative) and we comforted him with a few head scratches and a bowl of his kibble so he could join in on the final meal. 

We ate slowly, savoring the moment, but when sporks came up clean for the 5th or so straight scoop, we realized that procrastination had brought us as far as it could. Exchanging forlorn looks, we begrudgingly broke the spell and started wrapping up camp. I stowed my trash, pulled out the day's trail snacks, and screwed my bear canister closed for the last time. I know we've had our differences (see above lol), but I was going to quite miss my little snack fortress / mediocre seat. Tents came down, hammocks stowed, remaining water distributed, and packs packed. In the blink of an eye, our little forest nest had become just another clearing in a vast wilderness (albeit one with an air about it as if some particularly cool people had recently spent time there). Not exactly a speedy prepper and, admittedly, more sentimental than I generally let on, I was the last out of camp. McInnes, the good pal that he is, hung back to wait for me while I lingered.

Though hearts were heavy with the fact that this was the last day of our adventure, it wasn't time to lament the end just yet! We still had more than 8 miles of otherworldly hiking to enjoy and one more pass to surmount before we could mark this beautiful beast complete. The mood was lightened further by the thought that our packs, though still burdensome, would be at their absolute lightest of the trip (our strained shoulders and aching backs practically wept with relief)! Before even setting out for the day, I’d already plunged headlong into the valley of self-pity and ascended up the slope of gratitude to the high meadow of reasonable contentment. I figured we might as well put in some physical miles to go along with the emotional ones I was slogging through in my mind so, with a nod to my partner, Cam, we hit the trail. 

The initial trekking was through the woods to the East of Maroon Lake. This was a nice change of pace from the largely unwooded meadows and rocky scree fields we’d been navigating through the past couple of days. The trees cast long, cool shadows in the early morning light and their tall slender forms surrounded us comfortingly, bounding this otherwise vast expanse of wilderness. In this evergreen embrace, we mainly descended. This prospect is never that satisfying when you know a long climb is ahead, sure that every step you take down will have to be taken more effortfully back upwards before long. But you don’t get to go back and retroactively decide how billions of years of plate tectonics and erosion were to play out, so we made our peace with the trail and went with its flow. 

As if rewarding us for our easygoing acceptance, the tree covers opened around a bend to give us a clear view of the Maroon Bells up the basin ahead of us, their slopes still shrouded in shadow but the ridgeline to their left stretched out to catch some rays. We rounded the corner and followed alongside the path of Snowmass Creek, which was taking a break from its long fall from the peaks above to snake gently through the meadow to our right and (quite literally) collect itself. We soon came across some of the more ambitious water that was done soaking lazily in green pastures and was ready to escape the monotony for more exciting prospects downstream. Luckily, these flows seemed more of the minority faction of the creek’s collective opinion (long live the chill) and were therefore fjorded with relative ease. 

Leaving river politics in the rearview, we now began the climb. It welcomed us without much in the way of mercy, scoffing at the idea of a gentle lead-in and instead pitching directly into an absolute leg-crusher. In the face of this, Cam and I carried on deep conversations that were so deep, impactful, and engaging in the moment that they are permanently locked in time and can no longer be accessed (cheap cop-out for the fact that I can’t quite remember what we talked about??). Even though keeping quiet and saving our breath for our soon-screaming muscles would’ve been the wise move, it kept our minds occupied and helped the slog slip by more pleasantly (plus we’re a pair of defiant SOBs and it’d take a pretty serious grade to squash that). 

Treeline in Colorado is somewhere around 11,500ft and a handful of grueling switchbacks and a few stops to catch our breaths later we must have surmounted it, the forest opening up to the alpine valley above. Checking the altimeter this suspicion was confirmed, it reading 70ft above that rough benchmark. Even this far out in the wilderness there’s some order and reason to how it all works, and it’s little moments like this that help you open the door to that underlying reality. And what did that truth mean for us in that moment? Quite frankly, not much (lol), but it was cool to see the estimation matching our lived experience with, dare I say, such shocking precision. It also meant that the willow thickets that had taken the former place of these trees were no longer high enough to block my pasty ass from the sun’s merciless onslaught and we were forced to stop for a sunscreen break. 

This stop proved a fortuitous one, providing an impressive view back to the impressive forms of Haegerman and the Snowmass pair that had watched over our camp the night before. Once I was properly lathered and our nostalgic look back complete (too soon to be nostalgic??) we set out to catch the rest of the team. We made quick work of it too, motoring our way up the valley and finding ourselves on their heels right as we made the turn at the base of the talus field at the base of the mountain rising from the right side of the pass. Together, we looked up at the adventure’s final hurdle, Buckskin Pass, looming above. Ignoring protesting legs (they could not possibly know that this would be the last uphill they would be tasked to carry us up, so their whining was understandable), we set off on the trail. 

From here, the path twisted further up the valley before a quick climb to our left swung us around toward the major switchback. It sent us back in the direction we came, albeit far higher up, and we enjoyed another view of the mountains behind us as we traversed the strip of irony soil up and over a cliffy outcropping. On its other side, we approached the last turn gradually and with relative ease, a nice vista stretching out in front of us and flanked on either side by peaceful fields of alder, daisy, buttercup, and many other wildflower varieties that I couldn’t possibly hope to name correctly (as is, I have lingering doubts even about the ones I have). After navigating the existential crisis of the sheer number of existing plant species and how I’d possibly find time in my “busy” schedule to learn them all, I found myself nearly at the final cutback and navigated around it toward the Buckskin Pass approach. 

From here, it was a pretty straight shot. The specks of other hikers and a few of our faster compatriots could be faintly seen already straddling the ridgeline’s low point. Despite being in view, they were still a little more than a quarter mile away and it would be another 10 or so minutes until we were standing up there with them. As we got closer, a faint little trail outline from the pass up to the apex of mountain to its south came into view. At least I had thought it was a mountain, which brings up an unexpected component of this writing journey. 

There have been a number of peaks along the way that are nothing short of breathtaking, I'm talking some real jaw-droppers. But when I later went to try to find out what they were called (and, like, of course they have names, just look at them!), none were to be found. I consulted a variety of sites, forums, trail logs, and a set of increasingly more detailed topographical maps, nada! Maybe it's just a fundamental misunderstanding of what exactly it is that constitutes a "mountain" in official geologic terms. This “mountain” could be considered merely a high point on the ridgeline leading up to the twin peaks of the Bells. Or, perhaps, I may just not be using the right sources. You'd be hard-pressed to tell me that there aren't some Aspen old-heads or legendary Maroon-Bells trail vets that don't have at least SOME name for some of these behemoths! I mean you can't go around calling all of them "Unnamed Peak" or "spine of So-And-So Mountain", how's a fella supposed to orient themselves!? Whatever the cause of this nameless gap, this was again one of those times and I was forced to marvel over this hulking chunk of rock without a formal title to describe it with. Don’t feel too bad for me though, my enthusiasm for spotting and tracing out far-off hiking paths is nearly matched by that of griping about trivial matters that don’t really concern anyone!

After a few stops to take a few pictures of this nameless form and the picturesque route up it, Meg & I joined our friends already at the summit, the rest of the crew filtering in over the next few. We snacked and enjoyed the literal and metaphorical culmination of the trail’s many trials, tribulations, and triumphs. From here we could see around Unnamed Peak/Ridge and got a nice peripheral look at the iconic faces of Maroon and North Maroon. Tucked behind it we could see the path of West Maroon Creek that we'd followed up the valley nearly 3 days ago. How much had we changed since then? Had the several days of trekking, the otherworldly surroundings, the comradery that had flowered between us (like the wild trailside beauties!), or even the diet of heavily processed foods irrevocably changed us all as individuals? Would we return to society as ascendant beings, hovering over the ground by Mother Nature's sweet grace? Or perhaps we would renounce society and its trappings in their entirety, giving it all up for a life out in the wilderness like Muirs of old! 

As it turned out, nothing so extreme was on the horizon for us, but it would be no stretch to say that the experience would leave a lasting impression on each of us. I'm even willing to say it was a bit of a transcendent experience for me personally if merely to provide the excuse for why I need to come back and do this all over again. But that would be putting the cart a bit before the horse, we still had to make it back down the pass to the trailhead before we could say this journey was truly through. So without further ado, we hitched our team and rolled onwards. 

The pitch was steep down to the valley below and we were helped down it by some switchbacks (the cooler, more outdoorsy brother of the retractable-belt-linked-stanchion queues you find in the airport or the DMV). Rather than grey walls and dead-eyed employees though, our surroundings had a bit more flavor. The mountainside we cut our way down was coated in a luxuriant grass sea, its surface flecked with the countless nuanced hues of an army of flowers, almost calling forth imaginings of an uncharacteristically cheery Jackson Pollock. An array of jagged peaks close and distant ringed in this Benjamin-Moore ad and provided dramatic but comforting boundaries to this overwhelming landscape. 

Their significance was doubly felt as we encountered the scree slides and evidence of past rockfall that reminded us the severity of these mountains was more than just in appearance. But the winds of fortune were at our backs (thanks Trail Magic) and we made it down the most aggressive sections without incident. The rolling hills below were just as lush as those before and a winding stream cut its way through it, slipping between a pair of evergreen-topped rises. We, too, meandered our way through this verdant paradise. We were in no serious rush and besides, why would anyone in their right mind rush through this?!?!? Despite our best efforts, we still managed to continue forward. 

The group had spread out a bit over this stretch but soon reconvened at a little overlook. While some of the party members decided to drop packs (which were still plenty heavy despite the minimal remaining food & water weight) and rest for a few, Helena and Meg wouldn't dream of such a beta move and stayed loaded up. Standing on legs of steel and surveying their undisputed domain below (like a two-woman reimagining of that iconic Lion King scene), they made for an iconic #girlboss #trailqueen shot, which I felt honored to so much as behold, let alone capture. 

Once the “Women Leaders of the Current Trail / Future World” photoshoot wrapped up, we were back off on the descent. We soon encountered a creek but there was little need for water at this late stage, so we briefly just enjoyed its gurgling before hopping over it and continuing on down the trail. As we dropped further and further, the tree cover became denser and we spent a good amount of time dipping in and out of little stands of trees (this suited me fine as the sun was out in full force and a pasty guy like me will take all the shade he can get in these situations). Another consequence of the path was that, as we drew nearer to the main trailhead, the amount of day hikers grew exponentially and formerly tranquil trails became (comparatively) bustling and boisterous. 

One such of these fellow hikers, we learned, was out there on a quest to hunt the 2nd most dangerous game, mountain lions. This felt like a close brush with calamity as we were only one order of danger away from being prized wall mounts for this burly, militaristic man, but the win felt short-lived. If it wasn’t clear from the venerative, almost worshipful tone I strike when writing about the natural world, I’m a bit of a nature buff. Now I do not doubt that a sportsman such as this sees himself in a similar light, but I believe we’re on different ends of the spectrum that runs from tree-hugging hippy (me) to corpse-coveting huntsman (him). I’m not trying to high road the guy either (well… maybe just a lil’), we’re all entitled to our personal preference of recreational activities. Hell, I might like to go on a hunt myself someday! Not for the trophy mind you, but more to connect with our hunter-gatherer roots and, as a meat eater, engage firsthand with the process that sustains that appetite (you mean the cut, cleaned, and neatly cellophaned portions we find at our local supermarket can’t be found out in the wild?!?). 

But to hunt an animal truly for sport? One with little or no usable value outside of stuffing and displaying? An apex predator who’s extermination could have lasting and damaging effects on the health of the ecosystem? And to top it off, one that is quick, armed with razor-sharp claws & teeth, extremely difficult to find (and if you are lucky/unlucky enough to spot one, it’s likely already attacking you)? I mean, only five years ago a Colorado runner barely survived an attack by a juvenille who was an inexperienced hunter and weighed in under 40 lbs whereas a full-grown male can get up to 175 lbs…

I’m not advocating for this individual, or any for that matter, to have a dangerous run-in with one of the mountains’ most finely-tuned predators, buuuuuut I would be lying if I said there wouldn’t be a certain sort of dark irony to the possibility (a killer’s killer plan to kill a killer killed by the killer he seeks to kill killing him instead). Poetic justice aside, it turns out there was true legal justice at stake too. Upon deeper investigation, mountain lion hunting IS allowed in the state so long as you have taken and completed an educational course, passed the exam, and obtained one of the limited hunting licenses, BUT the season only runs from the end of November until April and we were wellllllll out of those ranges (almost as far away from either of the season as possible). If I was slightly Team Rock Cat before, I got upgraded to a diehard fan right then, full-priced merch and all. 

Luckily for all parties involved, tracking a lion in the summer is far, far harder (clever little death kitty) and it’s extremely uncommon for them to attack humans in the first place. There have been only 20 fatal encounters in the last century and you’re more likely to drown in your bathtub, be killed by a pet dog, or be hit by lightning (1000x more likely in fact), so the odds that would-be-poacher would end up on some puma’s menu were slim at best, much to my schadenfreude-ic dismay. All this to say, we met a stranger going the opposite way and gave him no information about the whereabouts of the mountain lions we hadn’t seen (I sure do know how to make a mountain out of a molehill haha). 

After this brief brush with the outdoor underworld, it became increasingly clear that this adventure was drawing close to its end. The earlier melancholia had slowly but steadily been usurped by exhaustion and, as the sun rose higher overhead, a desire for some feet-up time in a well-air-conditioned environment. Our journey officially crossed into its last leg as we reached the fork near Crater Lake and headed back down the valley toward the parking lot. From here there were only two lightly downhill miles to cover on the return to civilization’s strange, taxing, but oddly comforting embrace. 

There was one remaining hurdle to clear and it would come not in the form of spent muscles, dreams of permanent wilderness self-sufficiency, or even a freak cougar attack. No, our final trial was to be the game of human Frogger that is the weaving in and out of a legion of summer Sunday tourists. Before I go any further, there are two points I’d like to make here (another aside, there’s a shocker!). First, I initially used the word “legion” just because I think it properly addressed the scale of the veritable swarm of weekend warriors we were encountering, but then I was like… wait, isn’t there an actual attributable quantity to a legion? And yes, the ten cohorts, each with six centuries made up of ten eight-man contubernia, that made up your typical ancient Roman legion totaled somewhere around 4,800 legionnaires (as I’m sure your on-the-fly calculations already confirmed for you). Although the exact count fluctuated over the course of the Empire’s history, it gives us a rough figure to run this thought experiment off. 

My initial impression was ‘Hey, that actually seems like a pretty solid guestimate!’ Sure, it’s a pretty hefty figure but I extrapolated that there might have been a good 1,500 or so on the trail (at least it sure seemed that way at times) and maybe another 3k+ back in the packed viewing area by Maroon Lake’s edge and surrounding the parking areas. Feeling pretty good about myself after all this internal justification and glad-handing, I looked it up and, at its absolute peak, this little stretch of trail would see 1,300 people over a full day. Soooooo, a big piece of humble pie helped wash down the fact that fifteen hundred over the hour or so it took us to get down would qualify as a major overestimation. 

But I guess the point is that this trail was so packed that one could easily fall into the trap of guessing there were about 10x as many people as there truly were (or just that humans are really bad at wrapping their heads around large numbers, take your pick). Second (I’ll bet you forgot that there was another point at this point), I say all of this as if we’re not weekend tourists ourselves because we included Friday and a touch of Thursday in the mix. Live and die in delusions of grandeur!

With that out of the way, we can say with relative certainty that over this final stretch, we weaved in and out of innumerable, but decidedly less than a legion of, fellow tourists. Although this entailed plenty of trailside pullovers as we yielded to the uphill traffic (as trail etiquette dictates), many of our trailmates stepped aside and let us pass instead. I’d like to think it was because our hefty packs and rugged, trail-hardened visages had these puny, daypack-equipped plebians to forgo their right-of-way and move aside in reverence to these lords of the trail (it’s good to be king). While this may have played a part, I have a feeling that more significant is this “courtesy” was (and continues to be) a great excuse to step aside and rest a spell during a climb & that this “rugged” nature of ours came with a bit of a smell. I mean, we’d been hiking for nearly four days with only a few chilly dips in the way of bathing, so they may have seen (or more accurately, smelled) our condition as one of an impending and urgent public safety concern. Whatever the reason, our path was remarkably clear given the circumstances and we made fairly decent time. 

And as the evergreens gave way to stands of quaking aspen, we could see the tail end of Maroon Lake between their bare white trunks: our first true glimpse of the journey’s finish line. Quickened further by the nearness of the end and fantasies of cold beer and the obscene amount of Slope & Hatch tacos & cajun fries that would accompany it, it wasn’t long before we emerged from the woods to walk along its banks. After reading of our intrepid heroes' many exploits, you might have thought there would be fanfare among the general public (or at least within the group) but the moment slipped quietly by.

Sure, we knew we were hot shit, but how were they supposed to tell us apart from the other dirty nobodies returning from one of countless backpacking trips to be carried out that season? I cursed myself that I didn't have my military-grade bullhorn with which to inform them (alas, it was one of the last items axed from my packing list!). If I had, I’m sure trumpets would’ve started blaring and a parade in our honor quickly assembled, but, in its absence, chances of rallying the mob to our cause were slim to none. But by this point, frankly, we didn't give much of a damn. Our legs tired, backs and shoulders aching, throats parched, and mentally drained, we had suddenly transitioned from days of tranquility to the noise, bustle, and manicured pathways of a major trailhead. It was, to put it mildly, distasteful. 

In a way, it felt like the expedition had drawn us away from the trappings of civilization, shown us the beauty of living out and alongside nature, given a taste of a bygone way of being, and then, in its final crashing crescendo, delivered us back to the word it had us primed to forsake. Was there a lesson in this? A moral to this strange boomerang of fate? If there was, we were too burnt out to look for it (but upon reflection, this is the exact definition of a "loop". Right in the route name, pal). 

Overwhelmed and eager to escape this return to unfamiliar human company, we briefly considered, but ultimately passed on, trying to orchestrate a group photo (a decision I regret, but put back in the same situation, I'd probably double down on). In the end, we trudged unceremoniously off with not much more than a nod and a tired smile, each of us silently acknowledging the journey's true reward lay not in the finish line, but in the rugged miles behind us. And so, we disappeared into the everyday, bearing memories that would flicker back to life with each retelling, far from the bustling trailhead and its indifferent crowds.